Given the negative effects of Huntington's disease (HD) we would expect it to be selected against, however, the condition has an autosomal dominant inheritance with a 50% probability of either parent presenting the disease (Huntington's Disease: MedlinePlus Genetics, 2020)). HD is caused by more than 35 copies of CAG trinucleotide in the HTT gene (Eskenazi et al., 2007), affecting 1 in 10,000 people worldwide (Zielonka et al., 2020). A prevalent hypothesis for the lack of selection against the mutation of the gene that encodes huntingtin (HTT) is that the average age of onset (between 30 to 50 years old (Roos, 2010)) happens after reproductive maturity, allowing the inheritance of the disease even when it dramatically affects the life of the affected after it's full onset. However, this hypothesis does not explain why HD prevalence rates differ across populations and does not account for some of the nuances of the disease, such as an increase in fitness from enhanced immunological responses (Ellrichmann et al., 2013).
We know that humans have developed defense mechanisms against their environment, and we have diseases that result from those adaptations. For example, sickle cell anemia is more prominent in areas with a high concentration of mosquitos because the presence of a single allele of the mutation provides protection against malaria, and thus the disease is a side effect of an adaptation (Luzzatto, 2012). In the case of HD, we know it disproportionately affects Europeans (or European descent) populations, with a rate of around 5-10 in 10,000 (Pringsheim et al., 2012). The higher prevalence of HD in European populations gives rise to the idea that, like sickle cell anemia, HD  could be a consequence of an adaptation. 
Having the history of diseases in Europe, we can see an overlap between the bubonic plague (Y. pestis) in Europe and the first alleged HD cases (Cubo, 2017). The bubonic plague changed gene expression in humans; particularly, the plague affected the allele frequency of “HLA genes involved in innate and adaptive immunity” to bacteria (Immel et al., 2021).
For an adaptation to occur, the HTT gene has to be related to the immune response that would have been under the pressure of the plage. There’s strong evidence that the protein (the wild-type and the mutated) has an important role in the immune system. We see that people with HD have less incidence of cancer and autoimmune diseases than their HD- counterparts. Multiple studies show the relationship between HTT and the production of P53 and ZO1 (Eskenazi et al., 2007 & Thion et al., 2015), reducing the likelihood of cancer metastasis. Huntingtin (HTT) has a glutamine tail, and for every copy of CAG, the gene codes for additional glutamine; the number of copies of CAG determines the statutes of HD, with less than 26 consider normal (HD-), 27–35 repeats can have allele mutations, 36–39 display HD phenotypes and 40< are HD+. This mutated protein with the poly-glutamine (polyQ) interacts with P53 (a tumor suppressor) and accelerates the rate of apoptosis in the cells; this reduces the risk of cancer and autoimmune disease (even when the increased immune response given the elevated levels of P53), however, is also the caused why HD+ individuals have accelerated striatal neurons death (Eskenazi et al., 2007 & Saudou & Humbert, 2016). These benefits are further supported by the fact that people with HD tend to have more children (1.14 to 1.34 children for each HD+ compared to HD-) than their counterparts, gaving an increase in fitness in the prime reproductive years. 
Remembering that for a trait to be a considered an adaptation, it has to follow four criteria (heritable, increase fitness, develop for the function and current use), a mutation of HTT that boosts the immune response (and thus causes HD as a side effect) will satisfy them if we determine that the change that happens in the gene was a product of pressure by natural selection (i.e., the plague in this case). By what we stated above, we know that it’s extremely heritable, it increases the fitness of the people with the mutation (considering 26< copies of CAG a mutation) and is still increases the immune response (even when we are referring to the general increase immune response, further studies can be made to determine its effect on Y. pestis response). Combining all the evidence above (and thus avoiding a fallacy of correlation vs. causation, at least in the justification), we propose the following hypothesis:
If HD+ is a consequence of an adaptation to the plague, then the offspring of European populations that experienced the black plague (Y.pestis) will show a higher proportion of CAG copies on the HTT gene in relation to non-exposed counterparts. This would happen because the pressure exerted by the natural selection of the black plage would increase the frequency of the advantageous mutation to the immune response (i.e., the longer HTT gene), which will then increase the rate of HD+ when the CAG copies pass the 35< copies threshold. 

Research design
Because what we want to determine is the effect of the pressure on the length of the CAG repeat located in the first exon of the Huntingtin gene (HTT), given that it’s the cause of the poly-glutamine (polyQ) production. We will perform a genetic analysis of different populations before, during, and after the exposure to the bubonic plague and determine if there’s a significant increase (and possible change in the standard deviation) in the length of the gene. 
It will consist of an observational study. We will sequence the DNA of different populations (the overall sequence can be performed with SNPs to determine any hitchhiking gene or other relations), particularly the full length of chromosome 4, where the  HTT gene is located.


Figure 1. Diagram showing the difference between the original HTT gena and muttedted gene with repeated trinucleotide (Images sources:  U.S. National Library of Medicine, Huntington Disease: MedlinePlus Genetics, 2020)
We want to sample at least six populations and their evolution through time; this study represents a mix between a crossectional and a longitudinal study, where we get “snapshots” in time to understand the genome alteration thru time of populations under a different selective pressure. The first three come from European towns where there was a known record of the black plague that significantly affected the population and the migration rates are not exceptionally high to mitigate possible confounding variables. The other three will be the control of other populations (still in Europe, to account for different genetic interactions caused by the environment) where there was no exposure to the black plague (and there’s still relatively low migration) . We will need the DNA of at least 30 individuals from each town for each phase (possibility of applying the central limit theorem). The phases will be pre-outbreak, during outbreak years, and after the outbreak. For the first two phases, we will extract the DNA from corpses with an in-solution hybridization capture approach (Immel et al., 2021) and compare the lengths and changes of the HTT gene between the different phases. 


Figure 2. Maps showing the different cases (from 1347 to 1760) and migration of the black plague in Europe during the medieval age. The map and general distribution will be used to determine the particular locations that follow the requirements established in the study design. (Images sources: Curtis & Roosen, 2018 & Cesana et al., 2017)

We need the different locations because we assume certain genetic uniformity (at least in adaptation) for the whole European population. Given that this assumption can significantly impact the results, we need multiple data from as many European towns; for a budget, the evaluation of 3 towns in geographically different places (that also would account for the other environmental confounding variables) will be enough for the study. 

Expected results and interpretations
Suppose we see that the European towns where the outbreak happened have a significant increase in gene length, in comparison to the control groups, particularly after the outbreak (in comparison to before the outbreak). In that case, we will support our hypothesis that the plague proposed a selective pressure that leads to increased length (expecting it to be near the 35 HD+ thresholds). Suppose we don’t see any significant difference. In that case, we can falsify our hypothesis that the plague caused the selective pressure, and thus we can’t assert that HD is a side effect of an immune system adaptation. 
There’s some evidence showing that disease “has been increasing in frequency from an ancestral state of 7–12 repeats in a variety of primate species” (Eskenazi et al., 2007); however, the rate of what is happening (and thus the consequences) it’s not enough to discard an underlying pressure the lead to the directional and selective selection of increased hunting protein tails (and a, therefore, higher rate of HD disease) in populations with European ancestry. However, we might have to correct this increase in our statistical analysis. 
Another crucial factor that we have to consider is that Europe (even when it had one of the most notorious cases of the plague) is not the only continent where it happens. However, the descent of other populations where the plague was present (e.g., Asian descent) has HD at a laser rate. This fact doesn't take away that different populations could have developed various mechanisms, and in the European population, HTT mutation could have been one of them. Still, it opens the possibilities of other genetic interactions in the European genome that might have increased the probability of the fixation of the mutation. 
The still unknown detail of the role of HTT gives rise to the possibility that the mutation in the allele is a result of genetic hitchhiking, where the original adaptive mutation occurred in another gene. To mitigate the potential confounding result, the person's whole genome will be analyzed using SNPs; if there are linked genes to HTT, it will open new questions on the evolution of the mutation.

Justification
There's still much left to know about HD, and being aware of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) goals, understanding the cause of the disease will provide much-needed clarity for understanding the full impacts of the mutation in the body. This understanding can bring new types of therapy for patients that experience the disease (e.g., aiming to reduce the apoptosis in the neurons), and well-combating others (e.g., in HTT with a polyQ tail enhances the immune system while lowering autoimmune disease, the mechanisms can be used to treat cancer, autoimmune disease, and bacterial infections). After further studies are performed, this deeper understanding of the condition will lead to better outcomes for the people suffering from it (and even from other diseases). 

